README.md, before:

# statsd exporter [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/prometheus/statsd_exporter.svg)][travis]

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/prometheus/statsd_exporter/tree/master.svg?style=shield)][circleci]
[![Docker Repository on Quay](https://quay.io/repository/prometheus/statsd-exporter/status)][quay]
[![Docker Pulls](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/prom/statsd-exporter.svg)][hub]

`statsd_exporter` receives StatsD-style metrics and exports them as Prometheus metrics.

## Overview

### With StatsD

To pipe metrics from an existing StatsD environment into Prometheus, configure
StatsD's repeater backend to repeat all received metrics to a `statsd_exporter`
process. This exporter translates StatsD metrics to Prometheus metrics via
configured mapping rules.

    +----------+                         +-------------------+                        +--------------+
    |  StatsD  |---(UDP/TCP repeater)--->|  statsd_exporter  |<---(scrape /metrics)---|  Prometheus  |
    +----------+                         +-------------------+                        +--------------+

### Without StatsD

Since the StatsD exporter uses the same line protocol as StatsD itself, you can
also configure your applications to send StatsD metrics directly to the exporter.
In that case, you don't need to run a StatsD server anymore.

We recommend this only as an intermediate solution and recommend switching to
[native Prometheus instrumentation](http://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/)
in the long term.

### DogStatsD extensions

The exporter will convert DogStatsD-style tags to prometheus labels. See
[Tags](http://docs.datadoghq.com/guides/dogstatsd/#tags) in the DogStatsD
documentation for the concept description and
[Datagram Format](http://docs.datadoghq.com/guides/dogstatsd/#datagram-format)
for specifics. It boils down to appending
`|#tag:value,another_tag:another_value` to the normal StatsD format.  Tags
without values (`#some_tag`) are not supported.

## Building and Running

    $ go build
    $ ./statsd_exporter --help
    Usage of ./statsd_exporter:
      -log.format value
            If set use a syslog logger or JSON logging. Example: logger:syslog?appname=bob&local=7 or logger:stdout?json=true. Defaults to stderr.
      -log.level value
            Only log messages with the given severity or above. Valid levels: [debug, info, warn, error, fatal].
      -statsd.add-suffix
            Add the metric type (counter/gauge/timer) as suffix to the generated Prometheus metric (NOT recommended, but set by default for backward compatibility). (default true)
      -statsd.listen-address string
            The UDP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. DEPRECATED, use statsd.listen-udp instead.
      -statsd.listen-tcp string
            The TCP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. "" disables it. (default ":9125")
      -statsd.listen-udp string
            The UDP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. "" disables it. (default ":9125")
      -statsd.mapping-config string
            Metric mapping configuration file name.
      -statsd.read-buffer int
            Size (in bytes) of the operating system's transmit read buffer associated with the UDP connection. Please make sure the kernel parameters net.core.rmem_max is set to a value greater than the value specified.
      -version
            Print version information.
      -web.listen-address string
            The address on which to expose the web interface and generated Prometheus metrics. (default ":9102")
      -web.telemetry-path string
            Path under which to expose metrics. (default "/metrics")

## Tests

    $ go test

## Metric Mapping and Configuration

The `statsd_exporter` can be configured to translate specific dot-separated StatsD
metrics into labeled Prometheus metrics via a simple mapping language. A
mapping definition starts with a line matching the StatsD metric in question,
with `*`s acting as wildcards for each dot-separated metric component. The
lines following the matching expression must contain one `label="value"` pair
each, and at least define the metric name (label name `name`). The Prometheus
metric is then constructed from these labels. `$n`-style references in the
label value are replaced by the n-th wildcard match in the matching line,
starting at 1. Multiple matching definitions are separated by one or more empty
lines. The first mapping rule that matches a StatsD metric wins.

Metrics that don't match any mapping in the configuration file are translated
into Prometheus metrics without any labels and with certain characters escaped
(`_` -> `__`; `-` -> `__`; `.` -> `_`).

In general, the different metric types are translated as follows:

    StatsD gauge   -> Prometheus gauge

    StatsD counter -> Prometheus counter

    StatsD timer   -> Prometheus summary                    <-- indicates timer quantiles
                   -> Prometheus counter (suffix `_total`)  <-- indicates total time spent
                   -> Prometheus counter (suffix `_count`)  <-- indicates total number of timer events

If `-statsd.add-suffix` is set, the exporter appends the metric type (`_gauge`,
`_counter`, `_timer`) to the resulting metrics. This is enabled by default for
backward compatibility but discouraged to use. Instead, it is better to
explicitly define the full metric name in your mapping and run the exporter
with `-statsd.add-suffix=false`.

An example mapping configuration with `-statsd.add-suffix=false`:

    # comments are allowed
    test.dispatcher.*.*.*
    name="dispatcher_events_total"
    processor="$1"
    action="$2"
    outcome="$3"
    job="test_dispatcher"

    *.signup.*.*
    name="signup_events_total"
    provider="$2"
    outcome="$3"
    job="${1}_server"

This would transform these example StatsD metrics into Prometheus metrics as
follows:

    test.dispatcher.FooProcessor.send.success
     => dispatcher_events_total{processor="FooProcessor", action="send", outcome="success", job="test_dispatcher"}

    foo_product.signup.facebook.failure
     => signup_events_total{provider="facebook", outcome="failure", job="foo_product_server"}

    test.web-server.foo.bar
     => test_web__server_foo_bar{}


YAML may also be used for the configuration if the passed filename ends in `.yml` or
`.yaml`.  The above example mapping, in YAML, would be:

```yaml
mappings:
- match: test.dispatcher.*.*.*
  labels:
    name: "dispatcher_events_total"
    processor: "$1"
    action: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "test_dispatcher"
- match: *.signup.*.*
  labels:
    name: "signup_events_total"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
```

Using the YAML configuration, one may also set the timer type to "histogram". The 
default is "summary" as in the plain text configuration format.  For example,
to set the timer type for a single metric:

```yaml
mappings:
- match: test.timing.*.*.*
  timer_type: histogram
  buckets: [ 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1 ]
  labels: 
    name: "my_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
```

Note, that one may also set the histogram buckets.  If not set, then the default
[Prometheus client values](https://godoc.org/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) are used: `[.005, .01, .025, .05, .1, .25, .5, 1, 2.5, 5, 10]`. `+Inf` is added
automatically.

`timer_type` is only used when the statsd metric type is a timer. `buckets` is
only used when the statsd metric type is a timerand the `timer_type` is set to
"histogram."

One may also set defaults for the timer type and the buckets. These will be used
by all mappings that do not define these.

```yaml
defaults:
  timer_type: histogram
  buckets: [.005, .01, .025, .05, .1, .25, .5, 1, 2.5 ]
mappings:
# This will be a histogram using the buckets set in `defaults`.
- match: test.timing.*.*.*
  labels: 
    name: "my_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
# This will be a summary timer.
- match: other.timing.*.*.*
  timer_type: summary
  labels: 
    name: "other_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server_other"
```

## Using Docker

You can deploy this exporter using the [prom/statsd-exporter](https://registry.hub.docker.com/u/prom/statsd-exporter/) Docker image.

For example:

```bash
docker pull prom/statsd-exporter

docker run -d -p 9102:9102 -p 9125:9125 -p 9125:9125/udp \
        -v $PWD/statsd_mapping.conf:/tmp/statsd_mapping.conf \
        prom/statsd-exporter -statsd.mapping-config=/tmp/statsd_mapping.conf
```


[travis]: https://travis-ci.org/prometheus/statsd_exporter
[circleci]: https://circleci.com/gh/prometheus/statsd_exporter
[quay]: https://quay.io/repository/prometheus/statsd-exporter
[hub]: https://hub.docker.com/r/prom/statsd-exporter/

Commit message:

Resolves #84 adds support for regex mappers
  * Added `regex` match_type as valid config callout in both individual mappers
    and mapper defaults
  * Added test coverage for changes
  * Updated documentation to reflect usage of `match_type` parameter and
    provide example of a raw regex match rule

README.md, after:

# statsd exporter [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/prometheus/statsd_exporter.svg)][travis]

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/prometheus/statsd_exporter/tree/master.svg?style=shield)][circleci]
[![Docker Repository on Quay](https://quay.io/repository/prometheus/statsd-exporter/status)][quay]
[![Docker Pulls](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/prom/statsd-exporter.svg)][hub]

`statsd_exporter` receives StatsD-style metrics and exports them as Prometheus metrics.

## Overview

### With StatsD

To pipe metrics from an existing StatsD environment into Prometheus, configure
StatsD's repeater backend to repeat all received metrics to a `statsd_exporter`
process. This exporter translates StatsD metrics to Prometheus metrics via
configured mapping rules.

    +----------+                         +-------------------+                        +--------------+
    |  StatsD  |---(UDP/TCP repeater)--->|  statsd_exporter  |<---(scrape /metrics)---|  Prometheus  |
    +----------+                         +-------------------+                        +--------------+

### Without StatsD

Since the StatsD exporter uses the same line protocol as StatsD itself, you can
also configure your applications to send StatsD metrics directly to the exporter.
In that case, you don't need to run a StatsD server anymore.

We recommend this only as an intermediate solution and recommend switching to
[native Prometheus instrumentation](http://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/)
in the long term.

### DogStatsD extensions

The exporter will convert DogStatsD-style tags to prometheus labels. See
[Tags](http://docs.datadoghq.com/guides/dogstatsd/#tags) in the DogStatsD
documentation for the concept description and
[Datagram Format](http://docs.datadoghq.com/guides/dogstatsd/#datagram-format)
for specifics. It boils down to appending
`|#tag:value,another_tag:another_value` to the normal StatsD format.  Tags
without values (`#some_tag`) are not supported.

## Building and Running

    $ go build
    $ ./statsd_exporter --help
    Usage of ./statsd_exporter:
      -log.format value
            If set use a syslog logger or JSON logging. Example: logger:syslog?appname=bob&local=7 or logger:stdout?json=true. Defaults to stderr.
      -log.level value
            Only log messages with the given severity or above. Valid levels: [debug, info, warn, error, fatal].
      -statsd.add-suffix
            Add the metric type (counter/gauge/timer) as suffix to the generated Prometheus metric (NOT recommended, but set by default for backward compatibility). (default true)
      -statsd.listen-address string
            The UDP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. DEPRECATED, use statsd.listen-udp instead.
      -statsd.listen-tcp string
            The TCP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. "" disables it. (default ":9125")
      -statsd.listen-udp string
            The UDP address on which to receive statsd metric lines. "" disables it. (default ":9125")
      -statsd.mapping-config string
            Metric mapping configuration file name.
      -statsd.read-buffer int
            Size (in bytes) of the operating system's transmit read buffer associated with the UDP connection. Please make sure the kernel parameters net.core.rmem_max is set to a value greater than the value specified.
      -version
            Print version information.
      -web.listen-address string
            The address on which to expose the web interface and generated Prometheus metrics. (default ":9102")
      -web.telemetry-path string
            Path under which to expose metrics. (default "/metrics")

## Tests

    $ go test

## Metric Mapping and Configuration

The `statsd_exporter` can be configured to translate specific dot-separated StatsD
metrics into labeled Prometheus metrics via a simple mapping language. A
mapping definition starts with a line matching the StatsD metric in question,
with `*`s acting as wildcards for each dot-separated metric component. The
lines following the matching expression must contain one `label="value"` pair
each, and at least define the metric name (label name `name`). The Prometheus
metric is then constructed from these labels. `$n`-style references in the
label value are replaced by the n-th wildcard match in the matching line,
starting at 1. Multiple matching definitions are separated by one or more empty
lines. The first mapping rule that matches a StatsD metric wins.

Metrics that don't match any mapping in the configuration file are translated
into Prometheus metrics without any labels and with certain characters escaped
(`_` -> `__`; `-` -> `__`; `.` -> `_`).

In general, the different metric types are translated as follows:

    StatsD gauge   -> Prometheus gauge

    StatsD counter -> Prometheus counter

    StatsD timer   -> Prometheus summary                    <-- indicates timer quantiles
                   -> Prometheus counter (suffix `_total`)  <-- indicates total time spent
                   -> Prometheus counter (suffix `_count`)  <-- indicates total number of timer events

If `-statsd.add-suffix` is set, the exporter appends the metric type (`_gauge`,
`_counter`, `_timer`) to the resulting metrics. This is enabled by default for
backward compatibility but discouraged to use. Instead, it is better to
explicitly define the full metric name in your mapping and run the exporter
with `-statsd.add-suffix=false`.

An example mapping configuration with `-statsd.add-suffix=false`:

    # comments are allowed
    test.dispatcher.*.*.*
    name="dispatcher_events_total"
    processor="$1"
    action="$2"
    outcome="$3"
    job="test_dispatcher"

    *.signup.*.*
    name="signup_events_total"
    provider="$2"
    outcome="$3"
    job="${1}_server"

This would transform these example StatsD metrics into Prometheus metrics as
follows:

    test.dispatcher.FooProcessor.send.success
     => dispatcher_events_total{processor="FooProcessor", action="send", outcome="success", job="test_dispatcher"}

    foo_product.signup.facebook.failure
     => signup_events_total{provider="facebook", outcome="failure", job="foo_product_server"}

    test.web-server.foo.bar
     => test_web__server_foo_bar{}


YAML may also be used for the configuration if the passed filename ends in `.yml` or
`.yaml`.  The above example mapping, in YAML, would be:

```yaml
mappings:
- match: test.dispatcher.*.*.*
  labels:
    name: "dispatcher_events_total"
    processor: "$1"
    action: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "test_dispatcher"
- match: *.signup.*.*
  labels:
    name: "signup_events_total"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
```

Using the YAML configuration, one may also set the timer type to "histogram". The 
default is "summary" as in the plain text configuration format.  For example,
to set the timer type for a single metric:

```yaml
mappings:
- match: test.timing.*.*.*
  timer_type: histogram
  buckets: [ 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1 ]
  labels: 
    name: "my_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
```

Another capability when using YAML configuration is the ability to define matches
using raw regular expressions as opposed to the default globbing style of match.
This may allow for pulling structured data from otherwise poorly named statsd
metrics AND allow for more precise targetting of match rules. When no `match_type`
paramter is specified the default value of `glob` will be assumed:
```yaml
mappings:
- match: (.*)\.(.*)--(.*)\.status\.(.*)\.count
  match_type: regex
  labels:
    name: "request_total"
    hostname: "$1"
    exec: "$2"
    protocol: "$3"
    code: "$4"
```

Note, that one may also set the histogram buckets.  If not set, then the default
[Prometheus client values](https://godoc.org/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) are used: `[.005, .01, .025, .05, .1, .25, .5, 1, 2.5, 5, 10]`. `+Inf` is added
automatically.

`timer_type` is only used when the statsd metric type is a timer. `buckets` is
only used when the statsd metric type is a timerand the `timer_type` is set to
"histogram."

One may also set defaults for the timer type, buckets and match_type. These will be used
by all mappings that do not define these.

```yaml
defaults:
  timer_type: histogram
  buckets: [.005, .01, .025, .05, .1, .25, .5, 1, 2.5 ]
  match_type: glob
mappings:
# This will be a histogram using the buckets set in `defaults`.
- match: test.timing.*.*.*
  labels: 
    name: "my_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server"
# This will be a summary timer.
- match: other.timing.*.*.*
  timer_type: summary
  labels: 
    name: "other_timer"
    provider: "$2"
    outcome: "$3"
    job: "${1}_server_other"
```

## Using Docker

You can deploy this exporter using the [prom/statsd-exporter](https://registry.hub.docker.com/u/prom/statsd-exporter/) Docker image.

For example:

```bash
docker pull prom/statsd-exporter

docker run -d -p 9102:9102 -p 9125:9125 -p 9125:9125/udp \
        -v $PWD/statsd_mapping.conf:/tmp/statsd_mapping.conf \
        prom/statsd-exporter -statsd.mapping-config=/tmp/statsd_mapping.conf
```


[travis]: https://travis-ci.org/prometheus/statsd_exporter
[circleci]: https://circleci.com/gh/prometheus/statsd_exporter
[quay]: https://quay.io/repository/prometheus/statsd-exporter
[hub]: https://hub.docker.com/r/prom/statsd-exporter/
